Add RNA-seq Variant Discovery (RNAvar) workflow (#1188)
galaxyproject/iwc: workflows/variant-calling/rna-variant-discovery/README.md

# RNA-seq Variant Discovery (RNAvar)

This workflow is an implementation of a standard RNA-seq variant discovery pipeline. It handles the transition from raw reads to annotated variants using industry-standard tools.

> 

Reviewer: Here, the README should clearly state that the aim is to provide a faithful reimplementation of https://nf-co.re/rnavar and that currently there are still limitations.

## Workflow Logic
1. **Alignment:** **STAR** in 2-pass mode for high-accuracy splice-aware mapping.
2. **Preprocessing:** **MarkDuplicates** and **GATK4 SplitNCigarReads** to prepare the BAM for variant calling by splitting reads into exon segments.
3. **Recalibration:** **GATK4 BaseRecalibrator** (BQSR) using known polymorphic sites to adjust base quality scores.
4. **Variant Calling:** **GATK4 HaplotypeCaller** with parameters specifically tuned for RNA-seq (e.g., ignoring soft-clipped bases).
5. **Filtering:** **bcftools filter** applying hard filters ($FS > 30.0$, $QD < 2.0$) to reduce false positives.

> 6. **Annotation:** Functional annotation of variants using **SnpEff** against the hg38 database.

Reviewer: It makes limited sense to hard-code the SnpEff database and, thereby, restrict analysis to just one organism and genome version. The database choice should instead be turned into a workflow parameter.

I would populate the user choices from the "Locally installed SnpEff databases" instead of letting the user download databases on demand.

Please let us know if you need help with this.

Author: Done here: https://github.com/galaxyproject/iwc/pull/1188/commits/5146320e898fd1b092f01e231b5015a2a9a732f8

> 

Reviewer: After presenting the current workflow logic, it wouldbe good to have a "Limitations" section, where you discuss which features of the nf-core ppeline are currently not yet implemented.

Things hat I can immediately think of here are
- *Sample Sheet* support
- support for SnpEff alternatives for variant annotation
- optional UMI-Tools-based preprocessing
- no parallelization of the GATK4 SplitNCigarReads step (is this something that should be implemented at the tool level similar to what's done in the [freebayes wrapper](https://github.com/galaxyproject/tools-iuc/blob/0aeeab33a148d731eb4b2684de1d450c5b3e4bb0/tools/freebayes/freebayes.xml#L49-L62)?
- base recalibration and variant filtering are currently non-optional when they are optional in th nf-core pipeline

Basically, compare https://nf-co.re/rnavar/1.2.3/docs/usage/ to what's implemented here.
Of course, if you still want to fix any of these limitations, you're welcome to do so.

Author: Added the limitations section: https://github.com/galaxyproject/iwc/pull/1188/commits/5146320e898fd1b092f01e231b5015a2a9a732f8

## Testing and Parity

> The workflow is validated against a targeted subset of human RNA-seq data on chromosome 22. It successfully identifies the 54 high-confidence variants required to match the output of the original discovery engine.

Reviewer: Be more precise here and state the origin of that test data.

# RNA-seq Variant Discovery (RNAvar)

This workflow is an implementation of a standard RNA-seq variant discovery pipeline. It handles the transition from raw reads to annotated variants using industry-standard tools.

## Workflow Logic
1. **Alignment:** **STAR** in 2-pass mode for high-accuracy splice-aware mapping.
2. **Preprocessing:** **MarkDuplicates** and **GATK4 SplitNCigarReads** to prepare the BAM for variant calling by splitting reads into exon segments.
3. **Recalibration:** **GATK4 BaseRecalibrator** (BQSR) using known polymorphic sites to adjust base quality scores.
4. **Variant Calling:** **GATK4 HaplotypeCaller** with parameters specifically tuned for RNA-seq (e.g., ignoring soft-clipped bases).

> 5. **Filtering:** **bcftools filter** applying hard filters (`FS > 30.0`, `QD < 2.0`) to reduce false positives.

Reviewer: These filters are user-configurable in the nf-core pipeline so should become workflow parameters, too.

Author: Done: https://github.com/galaxyproject/iwc/pull/1188/commits/5146320e898fd1b092f01e231b5015a2a9a732f8 ✅

# RNA-seq Variant Discovery (RNAvar)

> This workflow is a faithful reimplementation of the [nf-core/rnavar](https://nf-co.re/rnavar) pipeline for the Galaxy ecosystem. It handles the transition from raw reads to annotated variants using industry-standard tools and follows the established best practices for RNA-seq variant discovery.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This workflow is an attempt at a faithful reimplementation of the [nf-core/rnavar](https://nf-co.re/rnavar) pipeline for the Galaxy ecosystem. nf-core rnavar handles the transition from raw reads to annotated variants using industry-standard tools and follows established best practices for RNA-seq variant discovery. This implementation for Galaxy still has a few limitations (see below).
```

## Workflow Logic
1. **Alignment:** **STAR** in 2-pass mode for high-accuracy splice-aware mapping.
2. **Preprocessing:** **MarkDuplicates** and **GATK4 SplitNCigarReads** to prepare the BAM for variant calling by splitting reads into exon segments.
3. **Recalibration:** **GATK4 BaseRecalibrator** (BQSR) using known polymorphic sites to adjust base quality scores.
4. **Variant Calling:** **GATK4 HaplotypeCaller** with parameters specifically tuned for RNA-seq (e.g., ignoring soft-clipped bases).

> 5. **Filtering:** **bcftools filter** applying hard filters (`FS > 30.0`, `QD < 2.0`) to reduce false positives.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. **Filtering:** called variants are soft-filtered with **bcftools filter** (default filter expression: `FS > 30.0`, `QD < 2.0`) to reduce false positives.
```

6. **Annotation:** Functional annotation of variants using **SnpEff** against a selected local database.

## Inputs
* **Forward Reads (R1)**: Fastq sequencing reads (forward). Supports gzipped (`.gz`) files.

> * **Reverse Reads (R2)**: Fastq sequencing reads (reverse). Supports gzipped (`.gz`) files.

Reviewer: This will need to change when using a list of pairs input.

> * **Reference Genome**: FASTA file of the reference genome (e.g., hg38).

Reviewer: Would become a cached genome on the server

* **Genome Annotation**: GFF3 file containing gene models for splice-aware alignment.
* **Known Variants (dbSNP)**: VCF file of known polymorphisms for base quality score recalibration.

> * **Known Indels**: VCF file of known insertions and deletions for base quality score recalibration.

Reviewer: document here also the new exon_bed-like input

* **SnpEff Genome Version**: The name of the locally installed SnpEff database (e.g., hg38).
* **Variant Exclusion Filter**: A bcftools-style expression for hard-filtering variants (default: FS > 30.0 || QD < 2.0).

> * **STAR Genome Overhang**: Sequence length around junctions for STAR indexing. Set to (Read Length - 1). For example, use 99 for 100bp reads.

Reviewer: Reorder inputs according to latest WF version

## Outputs
* **Final Annotated Variants**: VCF file containing discovered variants with functional annotations (impact, effect, gene names) from SnpEff.
* **MultiQC Quality Report**: An HTML report aggregating quality metrics from alignment and preprocessing steps.

## Testing and Parity
The workflow is validated against a targeted subset of human RNA-seq data on chromosome 22, sourced from the [nf-core/rnavar test dataset](https://github.com/nf-core/test-datasets/tree/rnavar). It achieves technical parity with the reference discovery engine, identifying 54 high-confidence variants.

## Limitations
Compared to the full [nf-core/rnavar (v1.2.3)](https://nf-co.re/rnavar/1.2.3/docs/usage/) implementation, this Galaxy workflow currently has the following limitations:
* **Sample Handling:** Does not support CSV sample sheets; inputs must be provided as individual datasets or collections.
* **Modularity:** Base recalibration (BQSR) and variant filtering are mandatory steps, whereas they are optional in the original pipeline.

> * **Preprocessing:** No current support for UMI-Tools-based deduplication or optional read trimming.

Reviewer: Also worth mentioning:

- the Variant calling step doesn't let you configure --gatk_hc_call_conf
- Filtering uses bcftools filter and doesn't offer clustered SNPs filtering
